# Rust on OpenTitan

This repository is a proof-of-concept to run Rust code on the OpenTitan "earlgrey" chip and its RISC-V Ibex core using register definitions generated by `svd2rust`.
It is neither pretty code nor finished. YMMV.

To demonstrate running code this implements a trivial "Hello, Rust" over the earlgrey UART.

## License

Most makefiles and Rust code are Copyright 2020 Nathan Holstein and released under the Apache 2.0 license.

The Rust `nostd` code was written while closely following the [RISC-V OS using Rust](http://osblog.stephenmarz.com/ch0.html) blog, licensed under the MIT license.

Linker scripts and assembly routine were directly lifted from the OpenTitan project, and Copyright 2020 lowRISC contributors.
The `earlgrey-registers` crate consists of code generated by `svd2rust` from HJSON/SVD files also from OpenTitan.

## Prerequisites

In addition to the developer setup described in the OpenTitan docs, you'll need at least the following tools:

 * make, xz

 * rust & cargo; I've tested only on 1.42-nightly

 * `svd2rust` and `rustfmt` installed via cargo

 * either:

     * a development toolchain for your host machine, or

     * a prebuilt riscv32-unknown-elf binutils+GCC toolchain

## The build process

This uses the SVD file generated by the build process from [the generate-svd branch](https://github.com/nholstein/opentitan/tree/generate-svd).
It should be possible to checkout that branch, and with Python >= 3.5 run `pip3 install -r python-requirements.txt && make -C hw top_earlgrey/data/top_earlgrey.svd`.

With the SVD generated, it should be possible to use `svd2rust` to generate a crate with all the register definitions.
If you checkout this repository and `opentitan` in the same directory the make build should automatically pick up the latest version.
For ease of use, the latest code is checked into this repository in the `earlgrey-registers` crate.

With this, rust, cargo, and the toolchain in place you should be able to simply run `make`.
With any luck this produces `earlgrey_uart.elf` in the top of the repo.

### Running the simulation

Again, I recommend following OpenTitan's [getting started documentation](https://docs.opentitan.org/doc/ug/getting_started_verilator/).
If successful, after running their `hello_world` you should be left with (among other things) a `uart.log`:

```
root@2c90fb446a5f:/opentitan# cat uart0.log
Version:    opentitan-snapshot-20191101-1-415-g1882bad
Build Date: 2020-01-06, 23:08:25
INFO: Boot ROM initialisation has completed, jump into flash!
Hello World! Jan  6 2020 23:16:19
Watch the LEDs!
Try out the switches on the board
or type anything into the console window.
The LEDs show the ASCII code of the last character.
```

You're now ready to run the Rust P.O.C. This should entail nothing more than swapping out `hello_world.elf` for `earlgrey_uart.elf` from the previous command:

```
root@2c90fb446a5f:/opentitan# build/lowrisc_systems_top_earlgrey_verilator_0.1/sim-verilator/Vtop_earlgrey_verilator \
		--meminit=rom,build-bin/sw/device/sim-verilator/boot_rom/boot_rom.elf \
		--meminit=flash,../opentitan.rs/earlgrey_uart.elf
```

And again, check `uart.log` for results:

```
root@2c90fb446a5f:/opentitan# cat uart0.log
Version:    opentitan-snapshot-20191101-1-415-g1882bad
Build Date: 2020-01-06, 23:08:25
INFO: Boot ROM initialisation has completed, jump into flash!
Hello, Rust
```

(A note for anyone testing on an FPGA: I've only run this code in Verilator, at the very least you'll need to change the default "verilator" feature in Cargo to get this running.)

### Building the RISC-V toolchain (optional)

If you don't have a risvc32 toolchain kicking around, the makefile includes a rule to download binutils-2.33.1 and compile the bare minimum `riscv32-unknown-elf-ld` and `riscv32-unknown-elf-as`.
Running `make toolchain` shouldn't take more than a few minutes with a decent connection and development setup.
I've tested this only on OSX Catalina, but binutils should have a stable build.

If you don't run this step you'll need to provide the necessary toolchain.
The OpenTitan project distributes a [docker container](https://docs.opentitan.org/util/container/README/) with the toolchain preinstalled.

## Next steps

This was mostly meant as a proof-of-concept, and likely won't be taken much further.
Hopefully, this can help inform decisions regarding OpenTitan's [consideration to use Rust](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+rust) for future software development.

That said, there are still some missing features. Primarily, this is supposed to implement a UART echo routine, but the UART appears misconfigured for reads.
So, a bit of debugging, and perhaps IRQ intergration. Aside from that, this code likely won't gain any additional features.

Outstanding questions:

 * `svd2rust` generates single-bit-writrs which don't require use of `unsafe`. However, multi-byte writers are marked `unsafe`.
    Is it possible to avoid this for registers to which any value can be written?
    (Compare [UART baud rate multiplier](https://nholstein.github.io/earlgrey_registers/uart/ctrl/struct.NCO_W.html#method.bits) to [UART date write](https://nholstein.github.io/earlgrey_registers/uart/wdata/index.html).)

 * The OpenTitan `hello_world.elf` binary is ~67K, compared to `earlgrey_uart.elf` weighing in at ~1.1M, when `hello_world` has many more features.
   The small bits of disassembled Rust instructions I've reviewed seem space efficient and wouldn't explain the difference.
   Perhaps there's some necessary GC to perform during linking?

 * Meson vs. Make?

 * `svd2rust` doesn't propagate any comments/license through to the generated source. Is it worth adding this?
